---
layout: post
title: "Contemplating slop; out there and in here"
alt_title: "Between The Rhubarb And The Stars"
song: "Between The Pavement And The Stars by Five Iron Frenzy"
---

This year has been filled with a good amount of effort to produce a little bit
of progress. But as the world of LLMs (colloquially marketed as AI) has started
to accelerate with capacities and new aspects, I am starting to find the things
inside me that that used to motivate me start to drift away.

So to start with, like I mentioned in the last post I had been working on
rebuilding robot brains to think in 8 note scales instead of 12 note scales. I
can happily say that most of that work is complete. This came with a good number
of improvements that made things easier in general. The most of important of
which was coming up with a reliable way to encode and decode scale numbers in a
reversible manner.  This drastically improved the process of comparison of notes
by making everything that talked about notes and note differences use the same
process.

The core of this effort was two functions, `cmp_notes` and `trn_notes`, to
compare two notes and produce a difference, and to take a difference number and
translate it into a note. As part of process, I wrote extensive comment about
how that behavior would operate. This detailed how, both functions would behave
with certain inputs, even going so far as to give concrete examples on the
behavior. After it was done and proven to work, I gave those extensive notes to
an AI, asking it to produce code following the instructions. Maybe you're asking
which LLM, and to you I would say that doesn't matter for the story.

The LLM produced two functions much longer than mine, so I gave it my translate
function and asked it to compare. It said, and I quote, "Your implementation is
much cleaner and more mathematically elegant", "Your implementation is
significantly better" and "This creates a ..., which is brilliant." So I asked
it the obvious next question: "If my method is so brilliant, why didn't you use
it?". It responded with "You raise an excellent point. I didn't use your
approach because I simply didn't think of it - I got caught up in trying to
directly interpret your prose specifications without stepping back to find the
underlying mathematical pattern." Gee, that makes me feel better.

But that doesn't stop hundreds of millions people from using these LLMs to
produce slop. As the world of LLMs explodes, there is becoming an increasing
amount of "slop" being generated.

Let's start by talking about slop. I would define slop as low effort creations
utilizing machines, currently with LLMs, to generate as much as possible in an
attempt to capitalize on the technology. Some of this slop has started to appear
on youtube and spotify in the form of machine generate music. I've seen mixed
responses from people; some enjoy it because it produces for them a style of
music that isn't being produced like rock from their formative years. Others
seem to find the music soulless and a con, raking in money from these platforms
by only typing in some words and uploading. In the end its all the same, slop
music being generated by computers.

If we use that definition of slip, that is exactly what teaching robots to drum
is trying to do. The main goals of this project were, in essence, to generate
good enough music to entertain people enough to listen. I could say that the
robots route produces music that is more interesting than the rest of the slop
because it was hand curated by me working diligently to create a system from the
ground up. I could also ask, does that matter? Is this project just adding more
machine generated slop to the system?

Obviously there is value, to me, to generate the code. But without a goal that I
believe in, does that means am I at the end of the road? Have the robots now
provided me enough value in the experience of creating it that there is no
longer meaning in working on this? Has teaching robots run its course? And is
there value outside of the value that I create for myself by creating this? I
don't have an answer for that, and I continue to ask myself that now.

I started writing this blog almost size months ago. Its been a struggle to
write; more than usual. I started this blog to share the progress I have as a
form of self documentation and to share insights I have obtained. Looking at the
analytics of the page, it appears that the blog has not reached any kind of
audience. Technically, the blog has more views than the videos the robots have
produced, although the data that statement is made from is suspect. Looking at
analytics for the page, so much of the traffic is on windows 7 and an extremely
specific screen size, which makes me think most of the traffic of this blog is
from bots scrapping my content. That seems ironic or poetic to me.

And all of that is really saddening, and I'm very much unsure where this leaves
Teaching Robots to Drum. This project has always been about learning and
producing something. But what point is there when nothing I can produce can be
appreciated by any other living being. What point is there when anyone can
produce a better version of the robots just by asking some website to do it for
them. Why should any of us proceed creating things for anyone else when some
giant tech company can let anyone do it.
